---
title: "C strings"
date: "2014-01-02"
categories: 
  - "c"
tags: 
  - "c"
---

Strings in C are kind of a pain in the ass.

> Char pointers defined with an initialization value \[may\] go into a read-only segment

consider the following:

```c
char * s1 = "Hello Word";       // 1  
const char * s2 = "Hello Word"; // 2

char s3[] = "Hello Word";  // 3
char s4[] = {'H', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o', '\n' }; // 4
```

In the first case, s1 is a \[modifiable\] pointer to a **read-only** string literal / array of char: we can do `s1 = "another string";`, but `s1[1] = 'a'` will result in an undefined behavior: segfault or can work 50% of the time. So 1 and 2 are equivalent.

The 3 and 4 initialisations are equivalent: we create an array of char, not a pointer, which means that the adress it references is **non-modifiable**: indeed, an array can be thought of as a _non-modifiable pointer to a specific block of memory_.

The difference between a pointer and an array is important if we plan to use the variable in a static context. Consider the following:

```c
// 1
char *hi = "hello";
char *array[3] = 
{
    hi,
    "world",
    "there."
};

// 2
char hi[] = "hello";
char *array[3] = 
{
    hi,
    "world",
    "there."
};
```

The first block triggers an `error: initializer element is not constant`, while the second works as expected.

## Initializing modifiable strings

In C, litterals are read-only. If we really want a modifiable string, two choices: either use malloc and then sprintf or such, or use strdup or asnprintf which take care of the malloc part for us. In either case, we should think of freeing the string when we are done.

```c
char * modifiable; // easiest way 
modifiable = strdup("A litteral");
```

If you are worried that you don't have strdup available, add `AC_CHECK_FUNCS([asprintf strdup])` in your configure.ac and use this block:

```c
#ifndef HAVE_STRDUP
char *strdup( char const * in ){
    if(!in) return NULL;
    char * out;
    asprintf( &out, "%s", in );
    return out;
}
#endif
```
